Okay, I have a whole bank of tape recorders rolling here in the background.
Okay, about how long do you think this is going to take us to do this, about
curiosity's sake? Oh, we'll rattle along for about 30, 45 minutes. Whenever you
get tired, it's real, you know, if you need to stop, you need to quit, if we
need to pick it up sometime later, that's fine, just go ahead and say so. I just
wanted to find out, you know, if I... If you want to take a swig out of the Jack
Daniels bottle, just say, excuse me a second, you know. No problem. So let's get
started with a lot of real mundane things here. Okay, we'll see what kind of
answers I can give to them. We'll talk about, let's start off with a real basic
question that you can answer in as much detail as you'd like. We'll ask you,
what type of store is it that you own? Okay. The Fantastic Worlds bookstore, the
store that I own, started off, you know, two and a half years ago, and we
specialize in items of the fantastic. We have comic books, science fiction
books, fantasy role-playing games, video games, and science fiction movies on
videotape, and all the other paraphernalia that you would expect in relation to
those items. For example, lead miniatures for role-playing games or dice, bags
to put comics in boxes, posters and portfolios, movie posters. So just an
assortment of things, you know, related. We go all the way from talking animals
like Garfield to Superman to Doctor Who and to Felix the Cat. But just a wide
variety of things, all, the only common element is that they're all science
fiction, fantasy, concepts to some extent.
That's your answer. Yeah, okay. I should have mentioned that. One thing we do is
there'll be a pause after your answer. Makes it easier to edit. Yes, I should
realize these things myself. Yeah, and also it lets me know that you are
actually finished talking. Yeah. Okay, let's back up a little bit, and why don't
you tell us how you got started in collecting. The way I got started in
collecting is actually the way I got started in reading. My paternal grandfather
was a bus driver, and he used to pick up comic books that people left on the bus
and bring them, you know, and I would get them from him. So I learned how to
read when I was about five years old by reading comic books that were left on
buses. So everyone who rode on a bus through much of Texas in 1959, 1958, 1960,
you know, I'm in their debt for being able to read from an early age and for my
love of comics and science fiction. And I went from that to keeping the comics
that I had read and putting them on a little shelf in my closet. And from that
point, it began to snowball where, you know, I began picking up anything that I
felt was related to comics. And then I eventually got into science fiction
reading when I met Fritz Leiber at a convention in 1968.
Okay, why don't you go into a little bit more detail as to how that kind of got
into your collecting sort of merged with your business?
At one point, you know, I noticed that my personal taste in comic books, the
ones that I felt were the superior examples of comic books as an art, and the
ones that seemed to be increasing in value on the collector's market, had a lot
in common. And I began to feel that there was the potential that if I picked up
a couple of extra copies of the ones that I felt were really good comics, that
they would appreciate in value faster than just going in and buying a handful at
random. And so I began to speculate in comic books by buying them on the hope
that someone would come along later and want to pay me more money for them than
I had paid for them myself. And then I began to do the same thing with science
fiction books, but on the smaller margin. I began buying books from England,
which were not generally available in this country in the late 70s, and taking
them to conventions and selling those. And I kept sending aside more and more,
you know, extra comics and more and more books. And I realized that I had to
either, you know, buy myself a larger house to store all this stuff in than I
was only using a couple of times a year, or going ahead and open a store for
retailing. I chose to open a store, you know, because this has much more tax
advantage to owning a house just to store books in.
Okay, let's get into a little bit more, just specifically on the collecting.
What do you concentrate on when you're collecting? Which particular type of
item? Do you want in general for myself, or what other people generally
concentrate on? Let's talk about yourself. When you're collecting, what do you
concentrate on? Okay, at this time, my main collection, I'm collecting things by
Philip Jose Farmer, Michael Moorcock, and Harlan Ellison. And so I just
concentrate, you know, essentially on finding things that I don't already have,
and I work off of bibliographies and lists and try to find things that are in
better condition than the ones I already have. So looking for hardcover books
that are, you know, where they're published in small quantities, and looking for
paperback books that are published under pseudonyms or from small presses are
the things that require the most attention for finding them at inexpensive
prices. And the best way to do that is to be aware of what, you know, names the
authors have written works under and what publishers their work has appeared
from so that you can kind of train your mind to key off whenever you see that
publisher's name or the title of the book, even if you don't remember the
author. Okay, you're sort of touching on another question I've got here. Let's
get into it a little more specifically. And what makes a book, a hardback book,
a valuable collector's type of collectible? Well, from the simplest standpoint,
what makes a hardback book collectible to anyone is simply supply and demand and
that there are more people wanting the book than there are books available at
cover price. Usually this doesn't take place, obviously, until after the book is
out of print. Oftentimes, science fiction fans will see a hardcover book and
they'll say, hmm, well, if I wait a year, I can buy that in paperback, and
they'll pass the book up. And then when the book comes out in paperback, they
read it and discover it's the greatest thing since they put raisins in bread. So
they go back and they want to buy it in hardcover for a durable copy. However,
at this time, the publisher has probably already either remaindered the book or
allowed the book to go out of print when all the copies were sold by the people
who did buy it in hardcover. And the supply of people out there looking for the
book and demanding, I want a copy of book X, and no books being available forces
the price up on the collector's market. The other things that can cause a book
to become valuable are usually errors in the same way that a stamp being printed
upside down would cause a stamp to be valuable. If a publisher decides to
accidentally destroy all the copies of a book so that only a few hundred exist,
or if only a few copies are made with some variation that was corrected in
another edition, this also can cause a book to be valuable. And then you also
can have a situation where you create a book just to make a book valuable. That
would be the case whenever you have a strictly limited edition where it's signed
and numbered.
Let's talk a little bit about those, the specialty edition type presses and
first editions.
When a person's collecting, like myself, I collect signed first editions.
What would you look for in a book to say, you know, well, aside from the fact
that you're collecting a specific author, let's say you're just looking at
buying a book and you say, gee, I wonder if this is going to increase in value.
Is there any sort of judgment you can use there? Well, the best judgment that
you can use is to try to read as many reviews of recent hardcover books as you
can. This is, you know, outside of, you know, going to the library and checking
the books out and reading them in hardcover editions. If you happen to live in a
city where the library still has a budget to be able to afford to buy such, you
know, things as science fiction hardcover books. Reviews, the only thing that
you can use to guide yourself with any certainty is to find someone that writes
reviews that generally has the same type of taste that you have. There are some
things which obviously you can be pretty sure of that a new Arthur C. Clarke
novel is going to be, you know, of interest to a number of people, even if it's
no good, that, you know, people would still want it merely because it's by
Arthur C. Clarke. The biggest problem is if someone happens to get a book
published in hardcover and they do not have a name built up for themselves, that
it's a real gamble, you know, to spend $12, $15, $20 to find out if the book is
worthwhile. And this is generally where books tend to springboard a lot. A good
example of this is that the books by Julian May, The Many Colored Land, and The
Golden Torque have shown a great deal of increase in attention from book buyers
and hardcover since they were, you know, nominated for awards in the science
fiction community. And since the book club edition came out, bringing a cheap
edition that a lot of people were able to read after it was read by a lot of
people, people were going, hey, you know, I like this book. Where can I get the
hardcover? And we've sold more copies of the hardcover of The Many Colored Land
in our store since the book club edition of this particular book came out than
we did in the entire time that it had been released.
Let's talk a little bit about the books from the standpoint of collectability as
far as book club editions and standard publishing house editions. All right. For
the most part, if you're buying a book club edition of a book, if it's already
been published in hardcover by a publisher and the book club edition is a
reprint, the book club edition has no collectible value whatsoever. The only
thing you're doing is you're buying a disposable book, which, you know, you're
buying a paperback that has hardcovers, but it's not going to ever have any
collectible value. In my opinion, in most people's opinion that are in the rare
book trade, the only way a book club edition might have a value would be if it's
the first hardcover edition. An example of this would be if DAW Books brings out
a novel by C.J. Cherryh and the book club brings out a hardcover edition of it,
that would be the first hardcover edition of the book, so it would have a
collectible value as a hardcover edition. But beyond that, beyond the times when
the book club brings out the only hardcover edition of a paperback book, the
book club editions, you know, just do not have any collectible value because
they're not first printings and they're not true hardcover book editions. Okay,
limiting yourself to science fiction and fantasy as far as categories go, how
much can a book cost from the various things you've seen over the years? How
much can a book cost? Can we... Okay, let's... What's... The question down is
what you want to know how much a book can go up in price or... Yeah, yeah,
and... Yeah, let's talk in respect to... Yeah, a used book or, you know, the
highest price you've ever seen on a book going for sale and stuff like that.
Well, the highest prices on hardcover books right now in the field tend to be in
books that were published by specialty publishers before there was mass
distribution of hardcover fiction for science fiction and fantasy. Examples
being especially like Arkham House books. The early books by H.P. Lovecraft and
Robert E. Howard in hardcover from Arkham House go for a great amount of money
even if they're in only so-so condition. That's, you know, a good example of,
you know, a book being worth, you know, hundreds of dollars that cost, you know,
less than $10 for the most part when they were first published.
Yeah, okay. It's a matter, I know where there are several of the Arkham House
first editions. I mean, in immaculate shape. I can only get my hands on them.
Well, I know where there's some R2, but they have to be people's collections and
they would take offense if I went in and put my hands on them. These are not in
somebody's collection. These are in a library. A library. Of course, this does
bring up a point which you haven't asked, but a book having been in the library
and stamped with library stamps and having had a card pocket attached to it and
glued in does decrease the value of a book and make it less desirable to a
collector. It's the same way that if you had a book that someone had taken a
mark slot and scrawled across a couple of pages, it would be less desirable.
Except like on an extremely rare book where library copies might be some of the
only copies you could actually get a hold of. Well, they'd still be less
desirable than a perfect copy, but if you had a choice between no copy and a
copy that wasn't in perfect condition, obviously you would probably be inclined
to go ahead and take a less than perfect copy.
There are a few books in my collection that were from libraries that had
clearance sales, so to speak, where they go through and take the books out that
haven't been circulating. I have a copy of Philip Jose Farmer's The Green
Odyssey in a Ballantine Books hardcover that at a convention in the summer
Philip Jose Farmer signed the book and told me that there were only a couple of
hundred copies of that book that actually were distributed and that most of them
ended up in military libraries. So it was rare to see one at all, but even rare
to see one that wasn't a library book. Any other sort of accidental finds that
were kind of valuable? In my own collection? Yes. I've had a number of strokes
of what I would have to consider luck as far as finding books that I consider to
be quite valuable. I was at a book fair at one time with Lewis Shiner, a short
story writer who's appeared in Omni and Shayal and various magazines and we were
just looking through tons and tons of hardcover books, miles and miles of
historical romances and we were giving up and over in a little bitty pile on the
side was a little bitty book that a little bit was sticking out and looked
familiar and it was a known press book written by Henry Kuttner under the name
of Lewis Padgett called Robots Have No Tales that was in perfect condition and
they had priced it at what I thought was the outrageous price of 40 cents but I
went on ahead and paid the 40 cents. that was a tough blow to pay that much
money for a book worth just, you know, 100, 200 times more than that but I was
able to tear loose the money. It's a rough life. Yes.
What part or item of your collection are you most proud of?
I would have to say that there's not really any one item that I'm most proud of
as far as being difficult to find. I do have a one-of-a-kind item in my
collection that I purchased at an auction this last summer. It's a translation
from the French of the book Philip José Farmer Conquers the Universe that
Philip José Farmer donated to an auction at a convention that my store
sponsored in Dallas during the summer and that has a cover letter and it's
signed by Philip José Farmer and a copy of the book in French that was
translated from and it's a translation that the publisher who has the option on
this book Berkley Books has decided that they did not want to publish in that
form so that'll be the only version of that in English. So I suppose as far as a
rarity having the only copy floating around of that should be a novelty to some
extent. Yeah. Something along the same line I know this is a pretty open-ended
question but what would you consider to be sort of like the ultimate item or
items in collecting in the hardcover field I guess? Well among the ultimate
items to find in the hardcover field are some of the double-day hardcover books
of recent years that had very small printings and for one reason or another had
very small distribution. Two that come to mind are Roger Zelazny's Nine Princes
in Amber and Philip Jose Farmer's Flesh and I would be in the position of
passing apocryphal potentially stories about why these books are in slow
editions or small editions but my understanding is that both of these books were
remaindered very quickly upon publication and had very little distribution
outside of review copies and library copies. So this those books are both hard
to find. I've only seen two copies of either of those books in the time that
I've been collecting books and looking at hardcovers since about 69.
and I have one of them. Which one do you have sir? Nine Princes in Amber.
Probably paid more than the cover price for the book. A few bucks more yeah.
Let's see let's talk a little about the what type of science fiction do you read
for pleasure? What type of science fiction do I read for pleasure?
I'd really prefer not to not to answer that not to have that particular comment
about not answering that included in the program. No problem no problem. I can
go off on the sidebar here and tell you not for transmission that right now I'm
having a difficult time reading science fiction because I've been around it for
so long that I've gotten to a saturation point but I'd rather not try to explain
that right now to a over the air type thing. No problem Bob. In fact I have the
same problem myself. I haven't read anything in nearly a year. That's how come I
edit the show and I produce it but I don't actually But you know I have read you
could ask me what books I've read recently because I have started reading stuff
again but I'm not reading them for pleasure. The only thing I've read for
pleasure lately is Fever Dream by George Martin. I wouldn't consider that a
science fiction book at all. Yeah. In fact George's book is one of the first
ones I'm going to pick up and read after Christmas. Let's get back to something
else. Okay. Your customers what are they most interested in science fiction or
fantasy or what do they seem to buy the most of? Well right now the types of
things that are the most popular with my customers in mass the ones that sell
the most are pretty much the same things that are reflected in most specialty
stores in North America if you check the Locus bestseller list and things and
that Piers Anthony's Xanth books sell tremendously well and the various books in
the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy series by Douglas Adams sell well and
beyond that we sell the Thieves World series by Robert Lynn Asprin very well. I
think a common thing in all three of these books is that these books are not
serious completely they don't there's a bit of whimsy in all of them. I think
it's safe to say that the bulk of my clientele prefers a little bit of humor and
lightness mixed in with their reading but we have strong backlist sales in
almost every aspect of science fiction fantasy and horror.
Okay let's see are you still actively collecting? I'm not collecting as actively
as I was a few years ago if only because that running my own business like this
has taken a lot more time than I would have dreamed it would when I began. So I
don't really have the time to go to conventions and prowl through thousands of
books looking for those one or two elusive items. I don't have time to go
driving around the countryside prowling through every used bookstore that I
happen to spy off the road. I don't even have the money to pay for the gas at
the current gas prices to do that even if I had the time. so my collecting is
still coming strong. I do have one advantage that most people don't have and
whenever people decide to get rid of their collection they bring it in and they
say you know Bob would you like to buy my collection? They come in with it and
you look at what they've got and you make them an offer and they they refuse and
you make them another offer and they accept. I get to go through it first and
pick out what I want for myself and I make myself some really good deals. So I
do have that advantage which kind of makes up for not being able to go out and
look around for stuff as much as I used to. I envy you that.
Sort of a collector's question. As far as storage and preservation of books what
sort of things would you recommend that a collector do? Well there are a number
of schools of thought on this. Obviously the ultimate type of thing you could do
would be to go with archival situations where you would have it so that the
humidity and the temperature would all be controlled and you would keep
everything out of direct sunlight so that you wouldn't have any fading. But the
best thing you can do is make sure that your books are not going to be getting
in any direct sunlight to cause fading on the spines or fading on the pages.
That you handle the books with care. That you don't eat food or take a bath
while you read them. That you don't loan them out to people who drool. You know
just common sense things will extend the life of the books. Beyond that we've
found the part of the book that usually gets damaged the easiest is the thin
paper dust jacket around the book. And there are plastic slip covers that are
available to put those into similar to what a library uses but they don't have
to be pasted down or stapled or taped down to the boards of the book. This
protects the dust jacket and also makes it where if you're holding the book that
you don't get fingerprints on the dust jacket or greasy marks on it. Beyond that
just keeping the books dusted. Obviously you don't want to keep them away from
termites or anything that happens to find paper as a real feast for food. You
don't want to store them underneath a pipe that drips or where your air
conditioner condensation is going to leak out. Just anything that you should
stop and think about storing paper products. Just anything that's going to cause
paper any damage you should try to avoid. Okay, what about a more perishable
item like a comic book storage or something like that? Well, a comic book, if
you're going to keep a comic book for a collection, it's important to handle it
carefully and if you're going to keep it, you should bag it up at least in a
plastic bag. If you have a comic book that's worth over $50, $100, you might
want to invest in bags of a type of plastic in which a lot of the things that
would be in a plastic that would potentially cause the comic to deteriorate in
50 or 100 years would be neutralized. If you want to go further along, if you
have comic books that are worth hundreds of dollars, there are things in the
paper, the process of making pulp paper, that will eventually cause it to rot.
You can have the stuff deacidified. But there's no point in doing this with just
every comic book on the shelf. Actually, if you don't have any errors and you
don't plan to be donating these to a library or something, the comic books, if
they're handled properly, are going to outlive you most likely. There's no real
danger involved. They should be kept away from high humidity and excessive
extremes of temperature. They've been kept in a dry and cool place and kept out
of direct sunlight. There are plenty of boxes that are available commercially to
store comics in that can keep up to 300 of them. And this is important because
comics are so easily damaged because they're so thin. The paper is such a
lightweight stock. It's just a matter of just properly caring for them and
keeping them from being bent and damaged. Okay. Let's talk just a little bit
more specifically on comics because I still collect a few.
Hard to think how to word this one exactly. When I started collecting comics, I
didn't collect them because I thought it was going to become something valuable
on down the line. What about now? If somebody was starting to collect comics,
how would you recommend they go about it? Well, the first recommendation I make
to people, if they come in and say, I read that so-and-so comic book has gone up
a thousand percent in two years. What comic book would you recommend that I
should start collecting? I tell people that they really shouldn't be buying
comics unless they enjoy reading comics. If there's nothing in that comic they
enjoy reading, then they're making a mistake getting into comics because there
are other things they could invest money in that people will not laugh at you
when you go to the bank and tell them that you want to use it for collateral. So
comic books as an investment is the kind of thing that's really been overplayed
in the media to some extent. I mean, it sounds real good for the few comics that
have appreciated a great deal of value, but speaking from experience, a bank
does not really think that that's the kind of collateral they want to hold for a
loan. So stocks and bonds still sound preferable to me as investments. Comic
books, the biggest thing that's happened in comic books recently is probably the
biggest thing that's happened since comic books began is that the ownership of
some of the characters is now being held by the individual creators in much the
same way that a publisher does not own a novel by Isaac Asimov. Isaac Asimov
would own the copyright. And now comic books are coming out where the writer or
the artist or both own the copyright to the character and the publisher is
publishing it for them in the same kind of a relationship that a book publisher
has with a novelist. And this is a complete change in the former system of the
publisher owning everything, everything being done on a work-for-hire basis as
though the artist was just coming in and doing the same type of function as
sweeping the floors inside the corporate offices. This is going to be a change
that's going to become more and more evident in the next few years and is going
to create a lot of more excitement within the comic book field.
I wasn't aware that they had done that. Just from your own speculation, how do
you think that might change the comics industry? Well, I have to go back a
little bit. The other thing that has changed the comic book industry is the
change in distribution where at one time all the comic books pretty much were
available at 7-Elevens and drug stores. And a 7-Eleven bought them from a
distributor, the same people used to that handle TV Guide and Time Magazine and
such things. And they got a bundle of comic books in. And what they didn't sell,
they sent back for credit. And this meant that the publishers had to print, just
like on anything else, had to print, you know, let's say 500,000 and they sold
200,000 and 300,000 got thrown away. With the rise of specialty shops that sell
comic books and science fiction books, those shops order their comics in a
different fashion. They order them non-returnable. They get a better discount,
but they have to keep everything they order. And it's now to the point where a
lot of comic book titles are being published only in the non-returnable format.
So if a person's only buying their comic books at a 7-Eleven or in a small town
that doesn't have a specialty store, there are a number of titles they would
never have seen. In fact, there are titles that are being published only for
specialty store distribution that are selling better than some of the comic
books that have distribution in both forms. Examples of this would be Camelot
3000 from DC Comics, which takes the King Arthur saga, brings it back to life,
but in the year 3000. Starslayer from Pacific Comics, which is moving to another
company called First Comics, which takes a man from out of the past and springs
him into the future, where he goes around and fights alien menaces and zooms
from galaxy to galaxy. These titles are only published in specialty stores. And
the thing with a book like Starslayer, which is written and drawn by Mike Grell,
who used to work for DC Comics doing The Warlord, is that Mike Grell owns the
copyright to Starslayer. And it's, you know, the fact that Mike Grell owns the
copyright means that when his contract with the publisher Pacific Comics expired
with issue number six, he was able to find a better deal and make more money for
himself and take it to First Comics, a new publishing company out of Chicago,
for starting with issue number seven. The idea that a person could move a
character from one company to another for a better financial deal had never
occurred to anyone a few years ago under the old system of publishing. But in
the same way in book publishing, that not every novel by an author necessarily
is going to come out from the same publisher. There's no reason for every issue
of a comic book to come out from the same publisher.
Yeah. That is very interesting.
Let's see. We've covered most of the things I have here. Let's go to one for the
good old educational question. What would you advise, you know, a person with
this, we've covered quite a bit in comics, what about somebody who's just
getting into science fiction or fantasy hardcover or paperback and they start
asking you about, well, what about collecting, you know, what would you advise a
beginning collector as far as selection or something like that? Well, first
thing I would do, obviously a person is going to come in and say, I want to
start collecting, has already read some stuff. So I would say to them, what have
you read so far? Give me the name of some authors that you've enjoyed, some
books that you've liked. I would springboard off of that to pointing out things
that I would feel that would be, you know, good collectible books within their
field of interest. So that was how, you know, I would handle that particular
situation.
Okay. Give me like an example if you were to come in and say, you know, I'm so
-and-so, I like this and this, you know, I could, but, you know, each of these
kind of things I handle on an individual basis. Because you can't really tailor
a response overall, you know, it just has to be geared for the individual
customers' wants and needs. Yeah, no, no, that was a perfectly adequate answer,
Bob.
Let's see.
You might not want to answer this one in that somebody listening to this program
may get in their car in California and drive and find your house and rip you
off.
How large is your collection?
Well, I understand that it's not possible to drive from California to Texas
without paying a real heavy toll somewhere between Abilene and Fort Worth. So
that probably won't be a problem. My collection covers the walls of two rooms in
my house. My house was built in about 1912 and has very, very high ceilings and
the stuff goes from floor to ceiling. I really don't have any idea how many
books are my collection right now because it kind of fluxes. You know,
occasionally I go through and I purge a few things out and I come back in and
add, you know, twice as many as to what I purged out. But my hardcover books
cover, you know, two of the walls and paperback books are on all the other
walls. But I have, for example, complete collections of all of the fiction of
Philip Jose Farmer, Michael Moorcock, Harlan Ellison in one form or another. I
don't have all the editions of their work, but I have all their books in the
same way with a number of other authors, Robert Block, James Blish, and authors
obviously that have only used a handful of books in print that are younger
authors that have started the business on a relative basis.
Okay. That's about got it covered, Bob. I think you did a very good interview.
There's a lot of other things we could talk about. The art portfolios and other
things which are collectible items. But I think we covered quite a bit as far as
these shows are geared toward the print medium, comic books, paperbacks, and
hardcover. Right. And this will probably be, you know John Marks, don't you? Mm
-hmm. Yeah, we did an interview with him also, and these will probably be melded
together. And they'll probably, I don't know how many programs will come out of
it, but I would imagine a week's worth. I'm going to go ahead and kill the tape
machines. Oh. Okay, tape recorders are rolling again.
If you would, give me your address, the one that you use for your mail order,
and if you also wish to include the phone number down there, just go ahead and
do it. And this will be worked into the programs, of course. Okay. That's
Fantastic World's Bookstore.
4816A is in Apple, Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, Texas, 76107. And our phone
number is 817-731-6222. Call now. Operators are standing by. It slices, it
dices, it's okay.